JOSS Paper (#66)
Becksteinlab/zarrtraj: joss_paper/paper.md

    orcid: 0000-0003-4390-8556
    affiliations: 1
  - name: Richard J Gowers
    orcid: 0000-0002-3241-1846
    affiliations: 1
  - name: Oliver Beckstein
    orcid: 000-0003-1340-0831
    affiliation: 1
affiliations:
 - name: Placeholder
   index: 1
date: 22 September 2024
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations provide a microscope into the behavior of 
atomic-scale environments otherwise prohibitively difficult to observe, however,
the resulting trajectory data is too often siloed in a single institutions' 
HPC environment, rendering it unusable by the broader scientific community.
Zarrtraj enables these trajectories to be read directly from cloud storage providers
like AWS, Google Cloud, and Microsoft Azure into MDAnalysis, a popular Python 
package for analyzing trajectory data, providing a method to open up access to
trajectory data to anyone with an internet connection. Enabling cloud streaming
for MD trajectories empowers easier replication of published analysis results,
analyses of large, conglomerate datasets from different sources, and training
machine learning models without downloading and storing trajectory data.

> # Statement of need

Reviewer: Not all the contents below belong to `Statement of need`; maybe add one or more sections about `Examples`, `Design Principles` etc.

The computing power in HPC environments has increased to the point where
running simulation algorithms is often no longer the constraint in
obtaining scientific insights from molecular dynamics trajectory data. 
Instead, the ability to process, analyze and share large volumes of data provide 
new constraints on research in this field.

> Other groups in the field recognize this same need for adherence to 

Reviewer: I think MDsrv https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/50/W1/W483/6593534 should also be mentioned here.

Reviewer: other papers worth citing:

- Bringing Molecular Dynamics Simulation Data into View https://www.cell.com/trends/biochemical-sciences/fulltext/S0968-0004(19)30137-9
- GPCRmd uncovers the dynamics of the 3D-GPCRome
 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41592-020-0884-y
- Sharing Data from Molecular Simulations https://pubs.acs.org/doi/full/10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00665?casa_token=Ivo26Sn_xFAAAAAA%3AwJLKekUvaYfOPZyi97LPZR7zir_x9cWlcbEb8UOZN7ZTqeNpmPE96rsLChkot3xPeGUtR4Es42lx7VKFyg

Reviewer: emphasizing that they only provide predefined analysis results or simple geometric features.

FAIR principles [@FAIR:2019] including the MDDB (Molecular Dynamics Data Bank), an EU-scale 
repository for biosimulation data [@MDDB:2024] and MDverse, a prototype search engine 

> for publicly-available Gromacs simulation data [@MDverse:2024].

Reviewer: all caps: GROMACS

---
title: 'Zarrtraj: A Python package for streaming molecular dynamics trajectories from cloud services'
tags:
  - streaming
  - molecular-dynamics
  - file-format
  - mdanalysis
  - zarr
authors:
  - name: Lawson Woods
    orcid: 0009-0003-0713-4167
    affiliation: 1 
  - name: Hugo Macdermott-Opeskin
    orcid: 0000-0002-7393-7457
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Edis Jakupovic 
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Yuxuan Zhuang
    orcid: 0000-0003-4390-8556
    affiliations: 1
  - name: Richard J Gowers
    orcid: 0000-0002-3241-1846
    affiliations: 1
  - name: Oliver Beckstein
    orcid: 000-0003-1340-0831

>     affiliation: 1

Reviewer 2: For myself [1,2], Edis [1, 2]:

```
 - name: Department of Physics, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, United States of America
   index: 1
 - name: Center for Biological Physics, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, United States of America
   index: 2

 ```
For yourself: something similar but for engineering and you could also add a present affiliation for SMS.

new constraints on research in this field.

Other groups in the field recognize this same need for adherence to 
FAIR principles [@FAIR:2019] including the MDDB (Molecular Dynamics Data Bank), an EU-scale 
repository for biosimulation data [@MDDB:2024] and MDverse, a prototype search engine 
for publicly-available Gromacs simulation data [@MDverse:2024].
While these efforts currently offer prototype solutions for indexing and 
searching MD trajectory data, the problem of efficiently distributing the data remains. 

Though exposing download links on the open internet offers a simple solution to this problem,
on-disk representations of molecular dynamics trajectories often range in size 
with large datasets up to TBs in scale [@ParallelAnalysis:2010] [@FoldingAtHome:2020],
so a solution which could prevent this 
duplication of storage and unnecessary download step would provide greater utility 
for the computational molecular sciences ecosystem.

Enter `Zarrtraj`, the first fully-functioning tool to our knowledge that allows 
streaming trajectories into analysis software using an established trajectory format.

> `Zarrtraj` is implemented as an `MDAnalysis` [@MDAnalysis:2016] `MDAKit` [@MDAKits:2023] that

Reviewer 2: MDAnalysis is a proper noun (name of the project) so no monospace here and elsewhere.

(I just put up an update to the MDA branding Style Guide to make this clearer https://github.com/MDAnalysis/branding/pull/10 )

enables streaming MD trajectories in the popular `HDF5`-based H5MD format [@H5MD:2014]
from AWS S3, Google Cloud Buckets, and Azure Blob Storage & Data Lakes without ever downloading them.
This is possible thanks to the `Zarr` [@Zarr:2024] package which allows 
streaming array-like data from a variety of storage mediums and [Kerchunk](https://github.com/fsspec/kerchunk), 
which extends the capability of `Zarr` by allowing it to read `HDF5` files.
Because it implements the standard `MDAnalysis` trajectory reader API,
`Zarrtraj` can leverage `Zarr`'s ability to read a file in parallel to perform analysis 

> algorithms in parallel using the "split-apply-combine" paradigm. In addition to the `H5MD` format, 

Reviewer 3: Explicitly mention ability to read slices somewhere.

Reviewer 2: Citation for split-apply-combine 

Hadley Wickham. The split-apply-combine strategy for data analysis. Journal of Statistical Software, 40 (1):1–29, 2011. doi: 10.18637/jss.v040.i01.

Have you tried it with 2.8.0-dev and the parallelized RMSD class?

`Zarrtraj` can stream and write trajectories in the experimental `ZarrMD` 
format, which ports the `H5MD` layout to the `Zarr` filetype.

> One imported, `Zarrtraj` allows passing trajectory URLs just like ordinary files:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once imported, `Zarrtraj` allows passing trajectory URLs just like ordinary files:
```

```python
import zarrtraj
import MDAnalysis as mda

> u = mda.Universe("sample_topology.top", "s3://sample-bucket-name/trajectory.h5md")

Reviewer 2: nice

Reviewer 2: I just say ``topology.tpr`` — sample is not needed and top is not a topology file format that is used directly. You can also use psf or pdb instead of tpr.

```
Initial benchmarks show that `Zarrtraj` can iterate
through an AWS S3 cloud trajectory (load into memory one frame at a time)

> at roughly 1/2 or 1/3 the speed it can iterate through the same trajectory from disk and roughly 

Reviewer 3: explicitly mention this was done in serial.

1/5 to 1/10 the speed it can iterate through the same trajectory on disk in XTC format \autoref{fig:benchmark}.
However, it should be noted that this speed is influenced by network latency and that

> writing parallelized algorithms can offset this loss of speed.

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't put out bold claims with evidence. If you can show an example of "parallelized algorithms" then explain how and show data to back up your claim. Otherwise leave it out.

Basic rule of academic writing: When you write a statement you back it up
* by showing your own data
* by citing someone else's work

Otherwise you leave it out or mention it at the very end as possible avenues for future work.

> ![Benchmarks performed on a machine with 2 Intel Xeon 2.00GHz CPUs, 32GB of RAM, and an SSD configured with RAID 0.\label{fig:benchmark}](benchmark.png)

Reviewer 2: Add more details on the test trajectory. Number of particles, number of frames, size (GB).

Is it one from MDAnalysisData, if so provide details (eg doi of location). 

Make your paper as reproducible as possible.

Reviewer: Also the bandwidth of the network?

With `Zarrtraj`, we envision research groups making their data publicly available 
via a cloud URL so that anyone can reuse their trajectories and reproduce their results.
Large databases, like MDDB and MDverse, can expose a URL associated with each 
trajectory in their databases so that users can make a query and immediately use the resulting
trajectories to run an analysis on the hits that match their search. Groups seeking to 
collect a large volume of trajectory data to train machine learning models can make use
of our tool to efficiently and inexpensively obtain the data they need from these published 
URLs.

This work builds on the existing `MDAnalysis` `H5MDReader`
[@H5MDReader:2021], and similarly uses `NumPy` [@NumPy:2020] as a common interface in-between `MDAnalysis`
and the file storage medium. `Zarrtraj` was inspired and made possible by similar efforts in the 

> geosciences community to align data practices with FAIR principles [@PANGEO:2022].

Reviewer 2: Move up instead of a final paragraph. This is more intro/methods. Reserve the last sentences for a bigger statement, such as the "envision" paragraph.

# Acknowledgements

> Thank you to Dr. Jenna Swarthout Goddard for supporting the GSoC program at MDAnalysis. 

Reviewer 2: A bit colloquial, write it as "We thank xxx for yyy."

Thank you to Martin Durant, author of Kerchunk, for helping refine and merge features in his upstream codebase 

> necessary for this project. Finally, thank you to Google for supporting the Google Summer of 
> Code program (GSoC) which provided financial support for this project.

Reviewer 2: Funding acknowledgement:
```suggestion
necessary for this project. Some of the work was funded through the Google Summer of Code program (GSoC) 2024.
```

Reviewer 2: I also reached out on the gsoc mentors list to ask for the officially preferred language.

Reviewer 2: Alternative suggested language (from someone on the mentors list who used it in https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/2632-2153/ad76f8 ):
```suggestion
necessary for this project. LW was a participant in the Google Summer of Code 2024 program.
```

Reviewer 2: I have not heard much more so I would go with the last version.

---
title: 'Zarrtraj: A Python package for streaming molecular dynamics trajectories from cloud services'
tags:
  - streaming
  - molecular-dynamics
  - file-format
  - mdanalysis
  - zarr

> authors:

Reviewer 2: You'll (1) need to have each author agree on authorship (see JOSS for what that means for them) and (2) need to come up with an order that is acceptable to everyone.

Reviewer 3: @ljwoods2 normal protocol is to write an email to each author asking them if they would like to be an author if they haven't already agreed.

Reviewer 3: You can CC myself and Oliver

Reviewer 2: And see https://joss.readthedocs.io/en/latest/submitting.html#authorship — as an author you have responsibilities

> The authors themselves assume responsibility for deciding who should be credited with co-authorship, and co-authors must always agree to be listed. In addition, co-authors agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work, and to notify JOSS if any retraction or correction of mistakes are needed after publication.

I would also add that authors need to have read the manuscript and approve it (approval review on GitHub) and be willing to contribute to the writing if asked.

  - name: Lawson Woods
    orcid: 0009-0003-0713-4167
    affiliation: 1 
  - name: Hugo Macdermott-Opeskin
    orcid: 0000-0002-7393-7457
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Oliver Beckstein
    orcid: 000-0003-1340-0831
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Edis Jakupovic 
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Yuxuan Zhuang
    orcid: 0000-0003-4390-8556
    affiliations: 1
  - name: Richard J Gowers
    orcid: 0000-0002-3241-1846
    affiliations: 1
affiliations:

>  - name: Placeholder

Reviewer 3: You need to gather the affiliations of the authors.

   index: 1
date: 22 September 2024
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

Molecular dynamics simulations provide a microscope into the behavior of 
atomic-scale environments otherwise prohibitively difficult to observe, however,
the resulting trajectory data is too often siloed in a single institutions' 
HPC environment, rendering it unusable by the broader scientific community.
Zarrtraj enables these trajectories to be read directly from cloud storage providers
like AWS, Google Cloud, and Microsoft Azure into MDAnalysis, a popular Python 

> package for analyzing trajectory data, providing a method to open up access to

Reviewer 2: Make clear why anyone would actually want to access MD trajectories --- what's the motivation for streaming?

I'd also cite efforts like MDDB and the eLife MDverse paper https://elifesciences.org/articles/90061

Reviewer 2: And machine learning, of course -- @hmacdope may have suitable citations at hand.

trajectory data to anyone with an internet connection.

# Statement of need

The computing power in HPC environments has increased to the point where
running simulation algorithms is often no longer the constraint in obtaining
molecular dynamics trajectory data for analysis. Instead, the speed of writing to disk and
the ability to share generated data provide new constraints on research in this field.
While exposing download links on the open internet offers one solution this problem,
molecular dynamics trajectories are often massive files which are slow to download and expensive
to store at scale, so a solution which could prevent this duplication of storage and unnecessary 

> download step would be more ideal.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
download step would provide greater utility for the computational molecular sciences ecosystem. 
```
Also mention that this encourages FAIR data access: https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-019-01720-7

Enter `Zarrtraj`, an `MDAnalysis` [@MDAnalysis:2016] `MDAKit` [@MDAKits:2023] which enables 
streaming these trajectories from AWS S3, Google Cloud Buckets, and Azure Blob Storage and Data
Lakes without ever downloading them using the standard `MDAnalysis` trajectory reader API.

> This is possible thanks to the `Zarr` [@Zarr:2024] package which allows streaming array-like

Reviewer 3: Add inspiration from geosciences community and cite the relevant papers

https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/climate/articles/10.3389/fclim.2021.782909/full

Reviewer 3: + others

> data from a variety of storage mediums and `Kerchunk`, which extends the capability of `Zarr`

Reviewer 2: reference (or link) for Kerchunk

by allowing it to read `HDF5` files in addition to `Zarr` files. Trajectory data can be streamed
in the `H5MD` format [@H5MD:2014], which builds on top of `HDF5`, and the experimental `ZarrMD` format,
which ports `H5MD` to the `Zarr` filetype. This work builds on the existing `MDAnalysis` `H5MDReader`
[@H5MDReader:2021], and similarly uses `NumPy` [@NumPy:2020] as a common interface in-between `MDAnalysis`

> and the file storage medium.

Reviewer 3: Note the use of zarr allows efficent slicing and seeking (possibly in parallel). Also are we making use of this parallelism? Otherwise its not different to mounting an S3 store with `fsspec`

> 

Reviewer 2: I would show some explicit Python code to demonstrate what this looks like in practice.

Minimal timing information is also important --- the first question anyone asks is "how slow is this".

Also address any known limitations.

> <!-- 

Reviewer 3: I can help write this bit, but now is a chance to be bold! without boasting, what do we see the community to be like with this in place.

# Figures

Figures can be included like this:
![Caption for example figure.\label{fig:example}](figure.png)
and referenced from text using \autoref{fig:example}.

Figure sizes can be customized by adding an optional second parameter:
![Caption for example figure.](figure.png){ width=20% } -->

# Acknowledgements
Thank you to Google for supporting the Google Summer of Code program (GSoC) which provided

> financial support for this project. Thank you to Dr. Hugo MacDermott-Opeskin and Dr. Yuxuan Zhuang 

Reviewer 2: If they are authors, they typically do not show up in ack.
